README.md, before:

# OntoGPT

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/13996/monarch-initiative/ontogpt.svg)](https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/13996/monarch-initiative/ontogpt)
![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/ontogpt)

## Introduction

_OntoGPT_ is a Python package for extracting structured information from text with large language models (LLMs), _instruction prompts_, and ontology-based grounding.

Two different strategies for knowledge extraction are currently implemented in OntoGPT:

[For more details, please see the full documentation.](https://monarch-initiative.github.io/ontogpt/)

## Quick Start

OntoGPT runs on the command line, though there's also a minimal web app interface (see `Web Application` section below).

1. Ensure you have Python 3.9 or greater installed.
2. Install with `pip`:

    ```bash
    pip install ontogpt
    ```

3. Set your OpenAI API key:

    ```bash
    runoak set-apikey -e openai <your openai api key>
    ```

4. See the list of all OntoGPT commands:

    ```bash
    ontogpt --help
    ```

5. Try a simple example of information extraction:

    ```bash
    echo "One treatment for high blood pressure is carvedilol." > example.txt
    ontogpt extract -i example.txt -t drug
    ```

    OntoGPT will retrieve the necessary ontologies and output results to the command line. Your output will provide all extracted objects under the heading `extracted_object`.

## Web Application

There is a bare bones web application for running OntoGPT and viewing results.

First, install the required dependencies with `pip` by running the following command:

```bash
pip install ontogpt[web]
```

Then run this command to start the web application:

```bash
web-ontogpt
```

NOTE: We do not recommend hosting this webapp publicly without authentication.

## Evaluations

OpenAI's functions have been evaluated on test data. Please see the full documentation for details on these evaluations and how to reproduce them.

## Related Projects

* [TALISMAN](https://github.com/monarch-initiative/talisman/), a tool for generating summaries of functions enriched within a gene set. TALISMAN uses OntoGPT to work with LLMs.

## Tutorials and Presentations

- Presentation: "Staying grounded: assembling structured biological knowledge with help from large language models" - presented by Harry Caufield as part of the AgBioData Consortium webinar series (September 2023)
  - [Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1rMQVWaMju-ucYFif5nx4Xv3bNX2SVI_w89iBIT1bkV4/edit?usp=sharing)
  - [Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z38lI6WyBsY)
- Presentation: "Transforming unstructured biomedical texts with large language models" - presented by Harry Caufield as part of the BOSC track at ISMB/ECCB 2023 (July 2023)
  - [Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1LsOTKi-rXYczL9vUTHB1NDkaEqdA9u3ZFC5ANa0x1VU/edit?usp=sharing)
  - [Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a34Yjz5xPp4)
- Presentation: "OntoGPT: A framework for working with ontologies and large language models" - talk by Chris Mungall at Joint Food Ontology Workgroup (May 2023)
  - [Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1CosJJe8SqwyALyx85GWkw9eOT43B4HwDlAY2CmkmJgU/edit)
  - [Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rt3wobA9hEs&t=1955s)

## Citation

The information extraction approach used in OntoGPT, SPIRES, is described further in: Caufield JH, Hegde H, Emonet V, Harris NL, Joachimiak MP, Matentzoglu N, et al. Structured prompt interrogation and recursive extraction of semantics (SPIRES): A method for populating knowledge bases using zero-shot learning. arXiv publication: <http://arxiv.org/abs/2304.02711>

## Acknowledgements

This project is part of the [Monarch Initiative](https://monarchinitiative.org/). We also gratefully acknowledge [Bosch Research](https://www.bosch.com/research) for their support of this research project.

Commit message:

adds instructions to use forked version

README.md, after:

# OntoGPT

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/13996/monarch-initiative/ontogpt.svg)](https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/13996/monarch-initiative/ontogpt)
![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/ontogpt)

## Instructions to use the forked version
Git clone this repo to your local directory (LD). 

Create a python venv using `pyenv virtualenv 3.11.7 <venv_name>`.
Activate the venv using `pyenv activate <venv_name>`.

Change directory to `ontogpt` (LD), and do `poetry install` (assuming you already have poetry 1.16.1 or greater installed)
This will setup all the necessary packages required.
 
Set the Azure OpenAI API Key just like illustrated
in Step 3) in the Quick Start section below.

Create an `etc/local_custom.toml` (copy of the `etc/local.toml` file) to set additional azure configuration values.

After the Azure API Key and additional configuration values are set, the following command needs to be run to
perform Human Phenotype Extraction on a text file.

```bash
python -m ontogpt.cli extract -i path/to/example.txt -t human_phenotype
```

## Introduction

_OntoGPT_ is a Python package for extracting structured information from text with large language models (LLMs), _instruction prompts_, and ontology-based grounding.

Two different strategies for knowledge extraction are currently implemented in OntoGPT:

[For more details, please see the full documentation.](https://monarch-initiative.github.io/ontogpt/)

## Quick Start

OntoGPT runs on the command line, though there's also a minimal web app interface (see `Web Application` section below).

1. Ensure you have Python 3.9 or greater installed.
2. Install with `pip`:

    ```bash
    pip install ontogpt
    ```

3. Set your OpenAI API key:

    ```bash
    runoak set-apikey -e openai <your openai api key>
    ```

4. See the list of all OntoGPT commands:

    ```bash
    ontogpt --help
    ```

5. Try a simple example of information extraction:

    ```bash
    echo "One treatment for high blood pressure is carvedilol." > example.txt
    ontogpt extract -i example.txt -t drug
    ```

    OntoGPT will retrieve the necessary ontologies and output results to the command line. Your output will provide all extracted objects under the heading `extracted_object`.

## Web Application

There is a bare bones web application for running OntoGPT and viewing results.

First, install the required dependencies with `pip` by running the following command:

```bash
pip install ontogpt[web]
```

Then run this command to start the web application:

```bash
web-ontogpt
```

NOTE: We do not recommend hosting this webapp publicly without authentication.

## Evaluations

OpenAI's functions have been evaluated on test data. Please see the full documentation for details on these evaluations and how to reproduce them.

## Related Projects

* [TALISMAN](https://github.com/monarch-initiative/talisman/), a tool for generating summaries of functions enriched within a gene set. TALISMAN uses OntoGPT to work with LLMs.

## Tutorials and Presentations

- Presentation: "Staying grounded: assembling structured biological knowledge with help from large language models" - presented by Harry Caufield as part of the AgBioData Consortium webinar series (September 2023)
  - [Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1rMQVWaMju-ucYFif5nx4Xv3bNX2SVI_w89iBIT1bkV4/edit?usp=sharing)
  - [Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z38lI6WyBsY)
- Presentation: "Transforming unstructured biomedical texts with large language models" - presented by Harry Caufield as part of the BOSC track at ISMB/ECCB 2023 (July 2023)
  - [Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1LsOTKi-rXYczL9vUTHB1NDkaEqdA9u3ZFC5ANa0x1VU/edit?usp=sharing)
  - [Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a34Yjz5xPp4)
- Presentation: "OntoGPT: A framework for working with ontologies and large language models" - talk by Chris Mungall at Joint Food Ontology Workgroup (May 2023)
  - [Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1CosJJe8SqwyALyx85GWkw9eOT43B4HwDlAY2CmkmJgU/edit)
  - [Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rt3wobA9hEs&t=1955s)

## Citation

The information extraction approach used in OntoGPT, SPIRES, is described further in: Caufield JH, Hegde H, Emonet V, Harris NL, Joachimiak MP, Matentzoglu N, et al. Structured prompt interrogation and recursive extraction of semantics (SPIRES): A method for populating knowledge bases using zero-shot learning. arXiv publication: <http://arxiv.org/abs/2304.02711>

## Acknowledgements

This project is part of the [Monarch Initiative](https://monarchinitiative.org/). We also gratefully acknowledge [Bosch Research](https://www.bosch.com/research) for their support of this research project.
